Yuktahaar Concept : Frequently Asked Questions What is a Yuktahaar group?
Yuktaahar is is a community of of health ,lifestyle and food conscious families who would like to understand , what good health and purposeful life is and find ways and means to improve it.
Yuktaahar is also a facilitator who will help to locate the good genuine sources of production and make it conveniently available to the conscious consumers.
We want to develop a seamless community of producers, facilitator and consumers and ultimately try to eliminate the market in all its forms.
In the process,we also want to develop a bond of sustained relationship between the producer, facilitator and consumer, while understanding each other's expectations and trying to mutually fulfill them.
So is Yuktahaar an organic grocery store?
No! Not at all. It is a service, which connects different organic/natural producers and conscious consumers. You can subscribe and avail our services through phone.
Is Yuktahaar a social work organization?
No! Yuktahaar is a commercial organization but its core is service. This business employs salaried employees. Yuktahaar's attempt is to make this service a sustainable commercial oraganisation generating a reasonable income.
Does Yuktahaar have any of their own products?
No .All of Yuktahaar's products are made by different farmers and producers and Yuktahaar mentions this in its every communications. The main objective is to connect the consumer with the producer.
So what are the services of Yuktahaar?
  The service of Yuktahaar is as follows:
● Educating people about diet and health
● For that, searching for different natural natural chemical free manufacturers, establishing
contact with them, establishing their credibility and disseminating their information to the
public.
● Determining the fair price of their product
● Communicating information about their product to the consumer group
● Arranging the delivery of goods from the producers to the homes of the consumers as
per the demand .
● If necessary, or if goods are coming from a long distance, take care of storage and
maintenance of the food items.
● Keeping track and accounting
● Keeping people informed about the toxin-free organic food movement and trying to get
everyone involved in this movement by eating clean food and increasing the demand for
clean food.
● Trying to create a relationship, like a family on top of this exchange, between consumers
and producers, and move forward by cooperating with each other.
Are the products from Yuktahaar certified organic?
Yuktahaar does not feel the need for an organic certificate, as Yuktahaar has direct-indirect relationships with all farmers and only by meeting or talking to them and establishing some kind of trust,post this only Yuktahaar incorporates the producers into its family. The purpose of Yulthaar is not just to trade goods but to build lasting relationships.
Yuktahaar is a transparent service through which you can get to know the manufacturer yourself, check and taste the product and then decide whether to buy it or not. In other words, Yuktahaar is also a conscious consumer like you, only Yuktahaar has taken the initiative to plan to develop the supply chain.
Do yukatahar items come from a specific geographical area?
Yuktahaar seeks out the producers of all the ingredients in the daily diet, among which the farmers of Nagpur and Vidarbha are given priority. But some products which are not grown around Nagpur or for which reliable farmers are available from far away , with whom contact has been established , are sourced. So there is no geographic limit to Yuktahaar. But going forward, the plan is that as many items as possible should come from within the 100 km area.
Why does Yuktahaar write the manufacturer's name in every bill?
The purpose of Yuktahaar is to connect people i.e. producers and consumers. So who is the producer of the food we eat? Who is a farmer? What is its manufacturing process? How much

  effort is there? This should be known to the consumer and further the Yuktahaar also intends to share the consumer data with the producer , thereby creating a conscious self-sufficient group.
Why does strategy focus on the producer rather than the product?
Today we see the commercialization of food and therefore we want to avoid the unrestricted use of chemicals and the commercialization of food only for profit.
Food is a basic human need and it is an important expectation that it should be pure wholesome nutrients. And it is most important that the person who fulfills this need should be like you.
All this is possible when the manufacturer is your friend, you know the manufacturer and you have a good relationship with the manufacturer. That is why the point is, to understand the manufacturer and the manufacturer to understand our needs, if we can deal directly without certification or other documents.
What is the product range of Yuktahaar?
Over 300 different things have been made available to the public so far in Yuktahaar.
Some basic foods, such as:
Yuktahaar Dry Grocery:
❖ Main grains:Wheat, rice, sorghum, ragi etc.
❖ Pulses : Tur, Peanut, Udid etc.
❖ Khada anaaj : Groundnut, gram, cinnamon, barbati, mont etc.
❖ spices : Chili, turmeric, coriander, Kasuri fenugreek, spices etc.
❖ wood cold pressed oil : Peanuts, Mustard, Sesame, Coconut, Almond etc.
❖ Pure Desi Cow Bilona Ghee
❖ Natural sweeteners: Brown sugar, 4 types of organic jaggery
❖ Pink salt
Yuktahaar Fresh fruits and vegetables
❖ Seasonal fruits : Natural, non-toxic fruits like pomegranate, grapes, oranges, mosambi,
watermelon, cantaloupe, amla etc. according to the season throughout the year.
❖ Seasonal Vegetables: All kinds of vegetables as per availability
❖ Milk products: Pedha, Khava, Paneer etc. (As available)
Other products: Gulkand, 10 types of laddoos, seasonal syrup, banana chips, banana chivda, banana flour etc. (More products are awaited)
How does the Yukthaar work?

  The entire model of Yuktahaar works on WhatsApp as per your demand.
Dry grocery You can order on WhatsApp whenever you want. Some goods are always available, those which are not, we order from some farmers and make available to you.
Seasonal fruits and vegetables Farmers send you availability information on WhatsApp, you reply to him and register your demand, then buy fruits and vegetables from the farmer and send them to you on the same day.
Do I have to join the WhatsApp group to become a member of Yuktahaar?
If you are interested in becoming a member of Yuktahaar, the first step is we add you to the broadcast list, so you start receiving personalized messages. That gives you an idea of the work of Yuktahaar .Once you understand and are happy with the system, then with your permission you can join the WhatsApp group.
In the future, there is a plan to have many such WhatsApp groups in proper places in Nagpur city.
Is there a membership fee for Yuktahaar?
No, at present, the work is being done on a voluntary basis, but due to the increase in occupancy, we will soon charge some fee or deposit for new members.
How can we help the Yuktahaar ?
As per the purpose of theYuktahaar
1.To buy the products of the Yuktahaar , give the appropriate feedback about it freely,
2 If there is any information of similar producers or farmers give the details to us.
3.To pay in time or also in advance at the beginning of the month, so that you can pay the manufacturers on time.
4.To inform your friends, neighbors, relatives, etc. about us and encourage them to join.
What will all this achieve?
Firstly , it will provide a conscious consumer a trustable reliable organic, toxin-free and natural produce. And more than that, we will create a social group of urban consumers, organized services like Yuktahaar, and food producers, and we will understand each other, meet each other's needs, enrich each other, and live good, meaningful, healthy lives. And that is the purpose of Yuktahaar.

 Welcome to the Yuktahaar family....